ʔamaʔ Dawhalch’ich’in Nasis
The Ambitious Snake

ʔooch’iy’ Poxishnaw, ʔamaa daʔ shoopin dulul’, hoyoohonoʔ Shoopin Nebech’.
Near O'Neal's, there are three mountain peaks named The Three Brothers.

Yalk’iʔwishxon’ ʔaman ʔoch’yewush; hidyaʔ ʔaman dulul’ shipt’an’.
They are standing close to each other; all of the hills are pointy.

Juʔbaʔ ch’axish bohulmu gidwiyat ʔamaamin.
Some live oak trees growing there surround them.

Tashin ʔutuʔ nahniʔ naʔash waʔeet’al; miʔin daʔ ʔaman k’ebes.
Those trees should be taller; instead they are stunted.

K’ebes ʔaman, mich ʔaman dindinich’.
They are short, very thick.

Galaabiyit xon xuʔnay’ gew. 
Life is hard over there.

ʔaman Shoopin Nebech’ ʔoch’yewshich’.
The Three Brothers are close to each other.

ʔamaa xon’ nasis; hoyowush ʔam Wit’ipkilaʔ. 
A snake lives there; its name was Wit'ipkila [a Miwok name].

ʔaman shoopin dulul’ benetwishtaʔ, Taa waʔ sipin’ waʔlaʔ?
The three peaks asked each other, “Is the sky far up?”

Huyuch’ may’ naʔash niwal waʔlaʔan? Haʔ daʔ ʔamaa xon’?
“Could we touch the sky? What is up there?”

Ch’edmataʔ ʔaman.
They thought about that.

Miʔin ch’edmat, T’ee may’ naʔash waʔaat’am’ wech’eetam’, nahniʔ may’ naʔash niwal waʔlaʔan.
And they thought, “If we had a long stick, we could touch the sky.”

Ch’edmam, Hew duʔ xon’ haʔ ʔug waʔat’; ʔamaʔ duʔ nasis; nahniʔ ʔamaʔ naʔash niwal waʔlaʔan.
They thought, “There is something long here; it’s a snake; perhaps he could touch the sky.

ʔamaʔ nasis mich wakiy’ waʔat’ hidyaʔan hol’gigna. 
This snake was longer than any animal.

ʔaman nebech’ wiltaʔ, Hudxa may’ t’ee nasis naʔash niwal waʔlaʔan. 
The brothers said, “Let’s find out if the snake can reach the sky.”

Huyʔag ʔam taana dugugwal’ sipin’, ʔutuʔ neyeh, dugugwal’ sipin’ taamum’. 
“Let him go straight up, like a tree, straight up that way.”

Doshxo may’ Nassi, Dugugwal’ tanga sipin’.
Let’s tell the snake, “Go straight up.”

Nasis wilit, Huuhuʔ ʔug.
The snake said, “All right.”

Tishtaʔ bokbokshiw ʔamin ʔooch’iy’ shoopina dullaw. 
He came out of his hole near the three mountains.

Miʔin wenmi dugugwalit sipin’. 
And he began to go straight up.

Wilch’inmi ʔam k’ut’a xoch’ooyow loolom, tantaʔ waʔ sipin’, ʔooch’iy’ ʔamaamin Shoopinaw Nebeech’iw. 
Keeping his tail on the ground, he went way up close to them, the three brothers.

Miʔin ʔohom’ naʔash taanal wakiy’ sipin’.
Then he couldn't go up any more.

Miʔin naʔash ʔohom’ yalk’iʔxol.
He couldn't stand.

Widintaʔ, ʔutuʔ neyeh.
He fell like a tree.

Widintaʔ waʔ ʔadil’, miʔin hashwintaʔ.
He fell way down and then he died.

Mich daʔ k’otiʔ, ʔohom’ naʔash wuk’uʔyuhanal. 
He was enormous, he can’t be moved.

Loolotoʔ ʔaman ʔam ʔamaa, miʔin ch’eek’intaʔ.
They left him there, then he rotted.

Miʔin ch’eek’intaw, loolotoʔ ch’eeya ʔam yoʔ xamaach’i ʔamaa.
After he rotted, he left his bones and ribs there.

Bok’toʔ ʔaman juʔbaʔan ch’eeya.
They found some of the bones.

Wakiy’ daʔ k’otiʔ hidyaʔan ganaaduʔun xamaach’i, wiltaʔ ʔaman.
“They are bigger than cows’ ribs,” they say.

Miʔin ʔaman ʔohom’ dameenataʔ yoʔ niwich’ waʔlaʔan.
Then they never tried that again.

ʔohom’ heddaʔ ʔaman hudaʔan’ huyuch’ daʔ waʔ sipin’ waʔlaʔ, haʔ daʔ sipin’ xon’.
They don’t know how far up the sky is, or what is up there.

Tishamyutaw, nasis taʔan tisheʔ. 
In the springtime, a snake comes out.

ʔamaʔ neyeh dameenayich’ tanach’ waʔlaw.
He is like that one that tried to go to the sky.

ʔamaʔ bokboksham’ ʔadlen dullaw Shoopinin Nebeech’in. 
He has a hole under the mountain of the Three Brothers.

Tishtisheʔ taʔan.
He comes out now and again.

Nahniʔ ʔamin ʔen’shay’ daʔ hidʔan’ nasis, halaadaʔ dameenayich’ tanach’ mich wakiy’ k’otiʔ hidyaʔan nassi.
Maybe his grandfather was a different kind of snake, because the one trying to go (up) is much bigger than all snakes.

ʔohom’ wat hudaʔan’ hawit’mi panaataʔ ʔadlen dullaw.
Nobody knows how he got under the mountain.

Miʔin ʔoopin tishtaw, ʔamaʔ tishmi taʔan gidwiyan’ dulla. 
When the sun comes out, he comes out and encircles the mountains.

T’ee wat taaneʔ ʔamaa, pooshoʔ taʔan jawwani shokwoʔon.
If anyone goes there, he blows a strong wind.

Taw’nem daʔ ch’axish k’ebes, ʔohom’ waʔat’. 
That’s why the live oaks are short, not tall.

Miʔin shokwoʔon pottaw ganaaduʔun, taweelen’ ʔam taʔan; 
When a cow is caught by the wind, it pulls away the cow;

miʔin taʔan ʔohom’ taʔishni yoʔ. 
and the cow is never seen again.

T’ee yokuch’ lanyeʔ nassi, lihmeʔ ʔaman taʔan.
If the Indians hear this snake, they run away.

ʔamaʔ nasis holoomun taʔan xon’ dullaw.
The snake always stays by the mountains.

Mich daʔ ʔamaʔ k’otiʔ, ʔohom’ naʔash helew taanal.
He is very big, he can’t go anywhere.

