Tew’ T’uytaʔ ʔoopo; Wuʔshul’ Teyeeshataʔ
Rabbit Shoots the Sun; Eagle Becomes Chief

ʔamaʔ ʔop mich ʔooch’iy’ hol’giʔin.
The sun was very near the earth.

Meejintaʔ xap’eelataʔ, ch’edmat yokuch’.
It made it very hot, people thought.

Tew’ ʔamaʔ yoʔ Wuʔshul’ t’oyoosham’.
Rabbit and Eagle had a bow and arrows.

Tew’ t’uytaʔ ʔoopo t’oyooshan.
Rabbit shot the sun with an arrow.

ʔamaʔ t’oyosh t’apaapayich’.
The arrow was flat on the end [a bird arrow]

T’uytaʔ t’oyoosha hawshil’ henew
He shot the arrow several times.

Miʔin ʔamaʔ ʔop sipin’ tishtaʔ hapt’is.
Then the sun came out and up a little bit

Miʔin t’uyhantaw ʔoopin, k’otiʔ ch’enbay’ Yelilk’in som’toʔ ʔoopo hoyinhiyin ʔam.
After they shot the sun, a large bird, Condor (yelilk'in) covered the sun with its wings.

Miʔin limeek’ataʔ.
Then it became dark.

ʔamaʔ Yelilk’in loolotoʔ ʔoopo.
Then Condor left the sun.

Miʔin doshtoʔ Wuʔshula, ʔugunga ʔilk’a!
Then he told Eagle, “Drink water.”

Wuʔshul’ wiltaʔ, ʔugnoʔ naʔ miʔin ʔilk’a
Eagle said, “I’m going to drink water.”

Miʔin Yelilk’in halaʔletaʔ ʔam sipin’.
Condor lifted him up.

Yelilk’in dameenataʔ hashaʔweyich’ Wuʔshula
Condor was trying to kill Eagle

halaadaʔ teyish hidaʔnin yokooch’am’.
because he was the leader of the other group of people.

Wuʔshul’ doshtoʔ Yelilk’ina, Maʔ deyga ʔugunga.
Eagle told Condor, “You go first and drink.”

ʔamaʔ Yelilk’inin yokuch’ wiltaʔ Wuʔshula,  Maʔ deyga.
But Condor's people told Eagle, “You go first.”

Hashaʔwemaʔsheyich’ ʔam.
They wanted to kill him.

Wuʔshul’ ʔohom’ taʔan ʔugunmaʔshen’.
Eagle did not want to drink.

ʔugunga, wiltaʔ Wuʔshul’ Yelilk’ina.
“Drink.”, Eagle told Condor.

Yelilk’in wilit, Huuhuʔ
Condor said, “Yes.”

Miʔin ʔamaʔ ʔoch’owo ʔam ʔadil’ xayaataʔ, miʔin ʔugunmu hashwintaʔ.
Then he lowered his head, and while drinking he died.

ʔamaa ʔilk’aw, ʔamaʔ daʔ shipt’an’ ch’ayax, hadbanay dadach’ waʔat’, mich shipt’an’.
At the pool there were sharp-edged rushes, four feet high, very sharp.

Yelilk’in xayaataʔ ʔam ʔoch’owo ʔadil’, ʔamaʔ ch’ayax chistaʔ ʔam mik’shiw.
When Condor lowered his head, the rushes cut him off at the neck.

ʔamaʔ Wuʔshul’ hach’a daʔ gaptan’ hidyaʔan ʔamaamin.
Then Eagle was now the captain of all.

ʔalit, Yelilk’in teyish hidyaʔan ʔamaamin, ʔamaʔ daʔ Wuʔshul’ ʔadlen ʔam.
Sometime ago, Condor had been a chief and Eagle was a subordinate chief.

Miʔin ʔamaʔ Wuʔshul’ hoyintaʔ ʔadil’ hol’giw.
Eagle then flew down to the earth.

ʔamaʔ hawitmi Wuʔshul’ hach’a teyeeshataʔ.
That's how Eagle became a chief.

